Add best practices manual for python and r (#90)
UtrechtUniversity/vre-docs: docs/manuals/python-environment.qmd

- Or read the [chapter on dependency management](https://utrechtuniversity.github.io/workshop-computational-reproducibility/chapters/dependency-management.html)

# Python Environment Managers on SURF Research Cloud
 
[This repository](https://github.com/UtrechtUniversity/src-python-example) contains an example project for demonstrating how to work with different Python environment managing tools on SURF Research Cloud.

The repository provides information on working with the following workspaces:

 - [Python Workbench Desktop](../workspaces/programming/python-workbench.qmd)
 - [Jupyter Notebook](../workspaces/programming/jupyter.qmd)

The environment managers used are:

- [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) (recommended)
- [`pyenv`](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)
- [`conda`](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)

Information on how to create a workspace can be found [here.](../first-steps.qmd#create-a-workspace)

# Getting Started

## New to Python Environments?

### Step 1: Identify Your Dependencies

Check if your project has one of these dependency files:

> -  `requirements.txt`

Reviewer: Could you change the order and start with `pyproject.toml`, I think starting the modern approaches could promote a bit the normalization and adoption

---
title: "Python Environments"
---
# Overview

> This manual describes the best practices for working with [Python environments](https://utrechtuniversity.github.io/vre-docs/docs/workspaces/programming/python-workbench.html#python-environments) in your SURF Research Cloud workspace.

Reviewer: Links can better be done using relative paths
```suggestion
This manual describes the best practices for working with [Python environments](../workspaces/programming/python-workbench.qmd#python-environments) in your SURF Research Cloud workspace.
```

Reviewer: I created a PR where the other links in the python document are fixed

Alternatively, if you're already working in an environment and want to capture what's installed:
```bash
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

Note: This captures *everything* in your current environment, so you may want to clean it up to include only what your project actually needs.

### Step 2: Set Up with `uv` (Recommended)

Navigate to your project folder and initialize:
```bash
cd /data/<your-storage-volume>/<your-project>
uv init 
uv venv --python 3.11  # create virtual environment with Python 3.11
source .venv/bin/activate
```

Install your dependencies:
```bash
uv add -r requirements.txt  # if you have a requirements file
# OR
uv add pandas numpy matplotlib  # add packages individually
```

Start working:
```bash
python your_script.py
```

When you need to recreate the environment elsewhere, you can do so with lock files. This records the specific versions of all dependencies that were installed when the project was last configured:
```bash
uv lock      # Generate uv.lock
uv sync      # Recreate environment from lock file
```

Use `uv sync` when setting up the project on a new machine or workspace.

> ## Already Using Environment Managers?

Author: changes made
